Hello again.
In this video, we're going to continue our overview of modern C++ features.
We've already looked at auto and for ranges, which are two of the most useful, and we're going to
look at another very useful feature, which is the lambda expression.
A lambda expression allows us to write code inside other code if we need a local function.
We can just write it there.
We don't have to scroll up,
think of a function name, write the code, then scroll back down and try to remember what we were doing
before.
Lambda expressions are anonymous
functions which are defined inline. Other languages have similar concepts.
They are often called closures. The main use for lambda expressions is for passing code as an argument
to a function call, or returning it from a function call.
Lambda expressions are another form of callable object.
We already have function pointers, which is the C way of doing it, and functors, which is the
traditional C++ way: you have a class which defines a function call operator.
But lambda expressions are much more convenient.
Defining a lambda expression is pretty similar to defining a function, except it doesn't have a name.
Instead of the name, we put a pair of square brackets, then we write the function arguments
as usual. You are allowed to omit the function arguments if there are not any.
And then we writes the function body as if we were waiting an inline function, just a pair of curly braces
with statements inside them.
So we have something that looks like this, we have a pair of square brackets, then we have the arguments,
then we have the body of the expression.
In this case, it'll double the argument and return the value.
Usually the compiler will be able to deduce the return type for you. If you are in C++11
It will only do that if the lambda expression consists of a single statement with a return.
If you have anything else, the compiler will assume it is void.
So if you want to return a value from a more complex statement in C++ 11, you have to put this
trailing return type.
So that is an arrow and the type.
That is not needed in C++ 14; the compiler can always deduce the return type. The only restriction
is that the return type has to be the same in every path through the code.
So if you have a branch and one branch returns a double and the other branch returns a string, that
won't work.
The main use for lambda expressions is as short, simple statements.
They come in very useful for working with algorithms in the C++ Standard Library.
These are functions which do various things like searching and sorting and swapping elements and so
on.
Usually they have overrides, which allow you to pass a callable object as an extra argument which
will customize them.
I've got an example here where we are going to start off by using a function pointer.
So this function here is going to return true if its argument is even and false otherwise.
So it takes an integer and it decides whether it is exactly divisible by two or not.
And then we can use the count_if algorithm function from the standard library, this takes three arguments.
The first two arguments are the range of iterators that we are going to be counting over.
In this case, it is going to be all the elements in a vector.
And then the third argument is a callable object.
This will iterate through all the elements in the range.
It'll call the predicate function with each element as its argument.
And if the predicate returns true, it will increment a counter by one.
And if false, it will leave it with its existing value. And then it will return the final value of
the counter.
So when we call it with these arguments, it is going to go through every element in the vector and return
the number of elements which are even.
So let's try that.
So we have two elements with even values. That looks OK.
So let's comment this out and use a lambda expression instead.
So we're going to use a lambda expression so we have the pair of square brackets, then the argument. This argument
is going to be an element, so it must be the same type as the elements.
So it is an int and then we have the actual code.
And the rest of the algorithm call is exactly the same.
You'll notice that this definition actually goes inside the algorithm function call.
So let's save that and run it.
And there we are, the vector has two elements.
The lambda expression that we have written cannot use any local variables. It can use global variables
and it can use its arguments, but you can't use local variables. To do that,
it needs to perform what's called a capture, and that is done by putting the name of the local variable
inside the square brackets.
So in this case, we have a local variable x, and then if we capture this variable, then the local
variable x will be available inside the lambda body.
This is captured by value.
So the x in here will be a copy of the value in the local scope.
If we want to modify the variable, we have to capture it by reference. This is done by putting an ampersand &
in front of the verbal name.
So if we have ampersand x inside the square brackets, then we can modify the variable inside.
So that is actually a reference to the local variable.
Any changes that we make inside the lambda body will affect the local variable.
So in this case, we would set x to be 43.
There are also special symbols which allow you to capture all local variables inside the scope. If we
put an equals sign,
That means we capture all the local variables by value.
So in this case, we have x and y available inside.
Or we can put an ampersand & which will capture every local variable by reference so we can modify the
local variables from inside of the body.
This is something you need to be a bit careful about.
There are also options for only capturing some variables by value and some by reference.
Finally, you can also use lambda expressions in member functions and you can access the member data of the
class. To do that, you need to capture the "this" pointer.
So "this" is the pointer to the object that the member function is being called on.
So when you do that, you now have access to the members of that object.
The way it's captured is slightly odd.
It is actually a reference to the dereferenced pointer, which means it's actually a reference to the
object.
So this allows the lambda expression to modify data members without any unusual syntax.
There are some changes in C++ 17 which allow you to be a bit more specific about how you want to do
that.
To give you an example of a lambda which performs a capture, I have rewritten the count_if program that
we had before, so we still have count_if with the same elements.
This time we are going to capture a local variable.
And instead of finding out if [the element] is a multiple of two, we're going to find out if it's a multiple of
this variable.
So we have this local variable radix.
We capture that by value and then the expression and then we perform the modulo expression using that
value.
The rest of the program is the same, so we are using the same vector.
So let's try this out.
So there you are, we have one element, which is an exact multiple of three.
OK, so that's it for this video.
I'll see you next time.
But meanwhile, keep coding.